Added metrics collection and metrics-based dashboards info to MongoDB (#4517)
SumoLogic/sumologic-documentation: docs/integrations/databases/opentelemetry/mongodb-opentelemetry.md

<img src={useBaseUrl('img/integrations/databases/mongodb.png')} alt="Thumbnail icon" width="120"/><img src={useBaseUrl('img/send-data/otel-color.svg')} alt="Thumbnail icon" width="45"/>

> [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/why-use-mongodb#:~:text=MongoDB%20is%20a%20document%20database,development%20teams%20using%20agile%20methodologies.) is a source-available cross-platform document-oriented database program. The Sumo Logic app for MongoDB supports logs and metrics from the open source version of MongoDB.

Reviewer: We can specify the version of mongo which we have tested against.

Author: fixed it

> [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/why-use-mongodb#:~:text=MongoDB%20is%20a%20document%20database,development%20teams%20using%20agile%20methodologies.) is a source-available cross-platform document-oriented database program. The Sumo Logic app for MongoDB supports logs and metrics from the open source version of MongoDB.The App is tested on the 7.0.14 version of MongoDB.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/why-use-mongodb#:~:text=MongoDB%20is%20a%20document%20database,development%20teams%20using%20agile%20methodologies.) is a source-available cross-platform document-oriented database program. The Sumo Logic app for MongoDB supports logs and metrics from the open source version of MongoDB. The app is tested on the 7.0.14 version of MongoDB.
```

MongoDB logs are sent to Sumo Logic through OpenTelemetry [filelog receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/filelogreceiver). The OpenTelemetry collector runs on the same host as MongoDB and uses the [MongoDB Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/receiver/mongodbreceiver) and the [Sumo Logic OpenTelemetry Exporter](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter/sumologicexporter) to send the metrics to Sumo Logic.

<img src='https://sumologic-app-data-v2.s3.amazonaws.com/dashboards/MongoDB-OpenTelemetry/MongoDB-Schematics.png' alt="Schematics" />

## Log and metrics types

> This app supports metrics and logs for MongoDB instance. The MongoDB logs are generated in files as configured in the configuration file `/var/log/mongodb/mongodb.log`. For more details on MongoDB logs, see [this](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/log-messages/) link.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This app supports logs and metrics for MongoDB instance. The MongoDB logs are generated in files as configured in this configuration file `/var/log/mongodb/mongodb.log`. For more details on MongoDB logs, refer to the [MongoDB documentation](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/log-messages/).
```

> The app supports metrics generated by the [MongoDB Receiver](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/blob/main/receiver/MongoDBreceiver/documentation.md).

Author: fixed it.

- **`sumo.datasource`**. has a fixed value of **mongodb**.
* **`db.node.name`**. Has the value of host name of the machine which is being monitored.

## Prerequisites

### For metrics collection

The MongoDB receiver fetches stats from a MongoDB instance using the [golang mongo driver](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-go-driver). Stats are collected via MongoDB's `dbStats` and `serverStatus` commands. The MongoDB receiver extracts values from the result and converts them to OpenTelemetry metrics.

### For logs collection

By default, MongoDB logs are stored in a log file.

1. Configure logging verbosity in MongoDB : MongoDB logs have six levels of verbosity. All logging settings are located in [MongoDB.conf](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/method/db.setLogLevel/). To select a level, set loglevel to one of:
   - 0 is the MongoDB's default log verbosity level, to include [Informational](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/log-messages/#std-label-log-severity-levels) messages.
   - 1 to 5 increases the verbosity level to include[ Debug](https://docs.mongodb.com/manual/reference/log-messages/#std-label-log-severity-levels) messages.

> 2. You need to set the [profiling_level](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/method/db.setProfilingLevel/) to a value of 1. But default its set to 0. You can also configure value of [slowms](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/method/db.setProfilingLevel/#std-label-set-profiling-level-options-slowms) to a value greater then or equal to 100. Thus can be done using the below command in mongosh:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. You need to set the [profiling_level](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/method/db.setProfilingLevel/) to a value of 1. But by default it is set to 0. You can also configure the value of [slowms](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/manual/reference/method/db.setProfilingLevel/#std-label-set-profiling-level-options-slowms) to a value greater than or equal to 100. Thus can be done using the below command in mongosh:
```

- **`db.system`**. Has fixed value of **mongodb**.
- **`deployment.environment`**. User configured. This is the deployment environment where the Mongodb cluster resides. For example: dev, prod or qa.
- **`sumo.datasource`**. has a fixed value of **mongodb**.
* **`db.node.name`**. Has the value of host name of the machine which is being monitored.

## Prerequisites

### For metrics collection

The MongoDB receiver fetches stats from a MongoDB instance using the [golang mongo driver](https://github.com/mongodb/mongo-go-driver). Stats are collected via MongoDB's `dbStats` and `serverStatus` commands. The MongoDB receiver extracts values from the result and converts them to OpenTelemetry metrics.

> ### For logs collection

Reviewer: Will need to add instruction for profiling level setting in mongo for sending logs.

Author: it is already there on line number 46

Reviewer: That is log level. We need to add instruction for setting profiling level

### Step 2: Configure integration

OpenTelemetry works with a [configuration](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/) yaml file with all the details concerning the data that needs to be collected. For example, it specifies the location of a log file that is read and sent to the Sumo Logic platform.

In this step, you will configure the yaml file required for MongoDB collection.

Below are the inputs required:

- **`Endpoint (no default)`**. The hostname and port of the MognoDB instance, separated by a colon. (For example: `localhost:27017`.)
- **Logs Path**. Enter the path to the log file for your MognoDB instance.

> - **username**. Enter the MognoDB username.

Reviewer: We should mention that username/password is optional

Author: fixed it.

- **password**. Enter the MognoDB password.

> User needs to provide the path to the mongo db log file configured as part of above steps. Typically the logs are located at the location: `/var/log/mongodb/mongodb.log`.

Reviewer: We should include this in logs PAth description itself and not mention this line seperately.

Author: fixed it.

Reviewer: I do not see it fixed. You need to remove this line from here and place it under "Logs Path"

Author: fixed it.

Reviewer: Can you remove line 104. There is no use of it after we have added details above

Author: Done

### Step 2: Configure integration

OpenTelemetry works with a [configuration](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/) yaml file with all the details concerning the data that needs to be collected. For example, it specifies the location of a log file that is read and sent to the Sumo Logic platform.

In this step, you will configure the yaml file required for MongoDB collection.

Below are the inputs required:

- **`Endpoint (no default)`**. The hostname and port of the MognoDB instance, separated by a colon. (For example: `localhost:27017`.)
- **`Logs Path`**. Enter the path to the log file for your MognoDB instance.

> - **`username (optional)`**. Enter the MognoDB username.

Reviewer: For username and password, can we mention something on the lines of mongodb receiver doc : 
**username (optional)** : If authentication is required, the user can with **clusterMonitor** permissions can be provided here.
**password (optional)**: If authentication is required, the password can be provided here.

Author: fixed it.

- **`password (optional)`**. Enter the MognoDB password.

User needs to provide the path to the mongo db log file configured as part of above steps. Typically the logs are located at the location: `/var/log/mongodb/mongodb.log`.

> You can add any custom fields which you want to tag along with the data ingested in Sumo. Click on the **Download YAML File** button to get the yaml file.

Reviewer: We also need to mention if authentication for mongo is configured then they need to download env file. Please check the content in any of the other app docs.

Author: fixed it.

Reviewer: in step3 after this there should be steps to include env file under linux tab. Please refer mysql doc for it.

Author: Ok

<img src='https://sumologic-app-data-v2.s3.amazonaws.com/dashboards/MongoDB-OpenTelemetry/MongoDB-Query-Logs.png' alt="Query Logs" />

> ### Sharding

Reviewer: Do we have a sharding dashboard ?

Author: Yes it is already there & it is logged based dashboard

Reviewer: So was the doc missing the description for sharding dashboard ?

The **MongoDB - Sharding** dashboard shows sharding related errors, events, failures and number of chunks moving between shards.

Use this dashboard to:

-   Identify Sharding errors and warnings.
-   Gain insights into Chunk operations.

<img src='https://sumologic-app-data-v2.s3.amazonaws.com/dashboards/MongoDB-OpenTelemetry/MongoDB-Sharding.png' alt="Sharding" />

### Replication Logs

> The **MongoDB - Replication Logs** dashboard shows replication events, errors, warnings, and nodes.

Reviewer: Have we made changes to this dashboard . This seem to be a log dashbaord.. and we have added replication related metric dashboard seperately. Why are we changing the description for this dashboard ?

Author: fixed it.

Use this dashboard to:

-   Monitor abnormal spikes in query volume.
-   Identify read versus write ratio of your application queries. This helps you to adjust indexes to improve query performance.

<img src='https://sumologic-app-data-v2.s3.amazonaws.com/dashboards/MongoDB-OpenTelemetry/MongoDB-Query-Logs.png' alt="Query Logs" />

### Sharding

The **MongoDB - Sharding** dashboard shows sharding related errors, events, failures, and number of chunks moving between shards.

Use this dashboard to:

> -   Identify sharding errors and warnings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Identify sharding errors and warnings.
```
